---
title: Agile and GitHub
template: _layout.html
summary: >
  GitHub so often is thought of as just source code and maybe an issue queue to report bugs. But, hidden beneath the surface is a powerful project management tool that can scale from a 5 person engineering team to a 50 person multidisciplinary team. From 1 repository to 100. Monoliths to microservices.
draft: true
---
GitHub so often is thought of as just source code and maybe an issue queue to report bugs. But, hidden beneath the surface is a powerful project management tool that can scale from a 5 person engineering team to a 50 person multidisciplinary team. From 1 repository to 100. Monoliths to microservices.

Project management in GitHub starts with the [Issues](https://guides.github.com/features/issues/). When first starting with issues, it's tempting to think of them as simple. A title, a comment; but, with that empty formless space, structure can take shape. GitHub allows [issue templates](https://github.com/blog/2111-issue-and-pull-request-templates) to be set up for each repository, allowing [markdown](https://guides.github.com/features/mastering-markdown/) files to automatically fill in the comment area of a new issue or pull request. You can do the same for [Pull Requests](https://guides.github.com/introduction/flow/), providing automatic structure to both new issues and requests to bring new work in.

Issue and Pull Request templates help to tame the tyranny of the unstructured text box. By giving contributors, internal and external alike, a place to start, it reduces a lot of the cognitive overhead of getting started. Often, though, one template may not be enough. Bug reports may need a different template from feature requests, for instance. Both Issues and Pull Requests can be also be templated using query parameters! Adding `title` and `body` query parameters to a project's new Issue or Pull request URL, and URL Encoding the values, multiple templates can be used! A great place to put these in a project's [Contributing Guidelines](https://github.com/blog/1184-contributing-guidelines). We do this in Punchcard, providing a base template for new functionality, and a query parameter template for bug reports, with the ability to create both from a [link in our Contributing Guidelines](https://github.com/punchcard-cms/punchcard/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#issue-guidelines).

Issues and Pull Requests can be more than just a description, though! With the introduction of [Task Lists](https://github.com/blog/1375-task-lists-in-gfm-issues-pulls-comments), contributors and maintainers can track their progress towards completion. For individual Issues or Pull Requests, task lists can be used to track the individual sub-items need to complete them. Need to track completion of multiple issues towards a single goal? Create an Issue that has a task list where each item is a link to one of those issues.

An issue _PowerUp_ we use in Punchcard is combining Issue Templates, Tasks Lists, and GitHub's Syntax Highlighting. In our [Issue Template](https://github.com/punchcard-cms/punchcard/blob/master/.github/ISSUE_TEMPLATE.md), we provide a space to allow contributors write a description, a [Gherkin](https://github.com/cucumber/cucumber/wiki/Gherkin) syntax block with a placeholder feature and scenario, and a task list placeholder for the feature and scenario. Gherkin provides a way for us to have user-centric expectations instead of just a list of technical features, and tracking each scenario in each feature as a task list allows us to both check them off as we complete them and provides us a clear understanding of what it means to have that issue completed.

With all of the Issues and Pull Requests a project may have, organizing them becomes very important. GitHub provides [Labels](https://help.github.com/articles/creating-and-editing-labels-for-issues-and-pull-requests/) to do just that. Think of Labels like a structured tagging system for a project. Every new GitHub repository comes with a set of default Labels, but the real power of Labels comes in when they are customized. Robin has a great blog post detailing their [Label Style Guide](https://robinpowered.com/blog/best-practice-system-for-organizing-and-tagging-github-issues/). Building one can make managing a project much easier, but building one can be a little challenging. To do so, we built [Reparo](https://reparo.herokuapp.com/). Not only does it make generating Label Style Guides easier, but it will also generate an image representation of the Style Guide, and put all of it in to a repository's wiki. [Punchcard's Label Style Guide](https://github.com/punchcard-cms/punchcard/wiki/Label-Style-Guide) allows us to file, sort, and filter our Issues and Pull Requests, and reduces the effort of our maintainers to do so.

A Label _PowerUp_, if an Agile method is being used, is to create Style Guide groupings for sizing (T-Shirt, Story Point, etc…), for different kinds of stories (Epics, User Stories, Bugs, etc…), even priority.

With Issues and Pull Requests sorted with Labels, the next step is tracking a group of them towards completion. This is what [Milestones](https://help.github.com/articles/creating-and-editing-milestones-for-issues-and-pull-requests/) are for. Often overlooked, Milestones have a title, an optional description, and an optional end date. The total number of Issues and Pull Requests added to a Milestone, the total number of open and closed items is shown, including a progress bar of percentage of items completed. Once complete, a Milestone can be closed, just like Issues and Pull Requests.

A Milestone _PowerUp_, if an Agile method is being used, is to use Milestones to track Agile Sprints. Name Milestones for their Sprint number and make sure a due date is assigned. Then, track progress of the Sprint using the Milestone's progress bar.

With all of the different moving pieces that make up a project, documenting everything is critically important. While not given as much love as other parts of GitHub, each repository comes with a [Wiki](https://guides.github.com/features/wikis/) that can be used to do just that. As previously mentioned, putting meta-information in to the Wiki, like the Label Style Guide or even documenting [team process](https://github.com/punchcard-cms/punchcard/wiki/Team-Process).  As a Wiki, it can be used for much more than technical or meta documentation, though. Wikis can be used for documenting a project's Road Map, current and future architecture, even [user personas](https://github.com/punchcard-cms/punchcard/wiki/Personas) for a project, as we do in Punchcard. Each Wiki is its own Git repo, as well, so they can be managed using Git just like a repository.

While GitHub provides a very strong project management platform with just its built-in functionality, expanding it with some other tools can really bring it to the next level. Tools like Trello, Zube, and Waffle all provide a great way of visualizing work, but the one I've found most useful is one called [ZenHub](https://www.zenhub.com/). ZenHub is a browser plugin that enhances GitHub's interface directly. This does two things: it allows project management to happen without leaving GitHub's context and providing a shared space for everyone, and instantly empowers all repositories with these capabilities.

ZenHub allows much of what would be done with labels in a more structured way. It adds Story Point sizing to each Issue and Pull Request, that when combined with Milestones provide Burndown charts. Taking over for labels and task lists of items, ZenHub provides a way to create and track Epics directly. Finally, multiple repositories can be combined together to track all of this across a conceptual project.

From Issues and Pull Request to Labels to Milestones and Wikis, GitHub provides a robust way to manage projects out of the gate. By leveraging Issue and Pull Request templates with task lists, explaining and tracking progress of enhancements and fixes is made scalable. Utilizing Labels, and building Label Style Guides, allows for straight-forward and easy-to-follow filtering and sorting of items. Grouping items in to Milestones provides automatic tracking of progress of a goal. Writing Wikis documents everything so anyone can get started and become productive. Together, when combined, a powerful project management system can be found just under the covers in GitHub. When combined with a sprinkling of functionality from tools like ZenHub, and the otherwise humble Issue all of a sudden is a fully-featured project management powerhouse, allowing collaborators and maintainers to plan and track their work. All from within GitHub.
